# Analysis-of-Sales-Data

### Project Overview

This project aims to analyze sales data of a store and identify the 3 highest-ranking products. Also the data was explored to determine:
1. The year with the highest sales
2. Revenue generated by each item
3. Top 4 selling product categories

   
### Data Source

The dataset for this project is from Coursera [Download here]( https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/12zY3h7hLnPdXobnzQYnC0rsS2zKzTQwHNG3boFM7T0M/edit?usp=sharing)
   
The project focuses on three main parts of the data analysis process: scrubbing data, exploring data, and visualizing data.

### Technologies Utilized

- Google Sheets - for data cleaning/exploration
- SQL - for data exploration
- Tableau - for visualization

### Data Scrubbing/Cleaning

Using Google Sheets, I reviewed the data and found some data quality issues, there were a lot of missing values. I used “COUNTBLANK” in Google Sheets to determine the missing values for each column. I identified the distinct values in each column using the UNIQUE function. The missing values were populated by checking and matching the records of corresponding values from the known unique observations. The “Customer_ID” column was removed because populating the missing values for this column might result in a data quality issue and lead to misleading outcomes. Also this column is not important for my intended analysis. The column containing “Size” was also removed as it had more than 50% missing values. I did some formatting like changing  the “Price” column to show currency rather than just figures.

### Data Exploration

This step involves exploring the dataset to answer important questions like:
1. Which year recorded the highest revenue?

   [Chart - Sales by year.docx](https://github.com/TaiJosh/Analysis-of-Sales-Data/files/14581062/Chart.-.Sales.by.year.docx)

2. What is the revenue generated by each item?

   [Chart - sales by item.docx](https://github.com/TaiJosh/Analysis-of-Sales-Data/files/14581066/Chart.-.sales.by.item.docx)

3. What are the top 4 product categories?

   [Sales by product category.docx](https://github.com/TaiJosh/Analysis-of-Sales-Data/files/14581068/Sales.by.product.category.docx)


### Queries
```
=QUERY(Data!A:I, "Select C, Sum(I) where C is not null Group by C Order by Sum(I) DESC")
=QUERY(Data!A:J, "SELECT YEAR(A),SUM(I) WHERE YEAR(A) IS NOT NULL GROUP BY YEAR(A) ORDER BY SUM(I) DESC")
=QUERY(Data!A:I, "Select G, Sum(I) where G is not null Group by G Order by Sum(I)")
```

### Data Visualization

The clean data [Download here]( https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1yDEeKXQkbAVnSdjUZFudeWqc1eqMkIf1DCZ5JQxa5Rw/edit?usp=sharing) was loaded into Tableau Public for enhanced visualization and delving deeper into the sales data to obtain insights.
View my interactive dashboard [here](https://public.tableau.com/app/profile/taiwo.joshua5521/viz/MostProfitableProductDashboard_17098801980210/MostProfitableProductDashboard?publish=yes).

### Analysis/Insights

Based on the analysis;

- The 3 highest- ranking products are Reddy Beddy, Kitty Climber and Feline Fix MixHere in that order. 
- The highest revenue recorded was generated in the year 2020.
- Overall, the food category generated the lowest revenue of about $2,784 while the other 3 categories (bedding, toy and treat) did over $4,000 for each category. 
- There was a sudden drop in total sales in 2021.
- Further investigation revealed that there were absolutely no sales recorded for the last 4 months of 2021 which must have impacted the overall sales.The transactions for those 4 months were probably omitted in error from the dataset provided for this analysis or the company stopped doing business.

### Recommendations

- Further investigation to know why there was no sales recorded for the last 4 months of 2021.
- The marketing team should work on a strategy to improve the sales of food category as this category generated the lowest revenue overall.

### Challenges/Lessons
It was challenging fixing the missing values but with critical attention to the dataset and sacrificing time, I was able to fix it. My key lesson from this project is that, I was reminded that the most time consuming task of a Data Analyst is data cleaning.



